# Lehman's Laws of Software Development

The Laws of Software Evolution, originally formulated by Lehman and Belady in
the 1970s, provide insights into the nature of software systems and their
evolution. The laws have grown from the original 3 to 8 over the years.

The fundamental law is that program evolution is subject to a dynamics which
makes the programming process self-regulating with statistically determinable
trends and invariances. Individual decisions may appear localized, but their
aggregation produces regular overall system responses.

The five key laws are:

1. Change is continuous (programs are never 'done')
2. Complexity increases unless work is done to maintain or reduce it
3. Program evolution follows statistically determinable trends and invariances
4. Work rates are invariant (the global activity rate on a project tends to be
   stable)
5. Complexity in successive releases is statistically invariant (perceived
   complexity in each release tends to be stable)

These laws arise from the nonlinear relationship between the magnitude of a
system change and the effort required to absorb that change. Factors like
feedback paths, organizational checks and balances, human interactions, and code
rigidity combine to yield the statistically regular behavior.

In modern software engineering, the laws remain relevant. They align with
practices like agile development, modular design, microservices, DevOps, and
CI/CD which help manage complexity and enable software to evolve continually.
The laws guide engineers in delivering robust, evolving systems.

However, studies of open-source projects have shown mixed results in validating
the laws. While some laws like continuous change and continuing growth have been
consistently validated, others related to growth patterns have been invalidated
in projects with accelerating growth.

In summary, the Laws of Software Evolution provide an enduring framework for
understanding the dynamics of software systems, even as the specifics of how
they manifest may vary based on the development practices and growth
trajectories of individual projects.
